In the previous lecture we introduced the
notion of pose and poses; a way of describing
both the translation and the orientation of
one coordinate frame with respect to another.
And the notation we used is based on the Greek
letter ksi and we used that to represent pose
and we used the letter B the subscript to
indicate that we're talking about the pose
of the coordinate frame B and the leading
index, in this case A, to indicate that the
pose is with respect to coordinate frame A. So we read this symbol as the pose of B with respect to A.
Things are not much different in 3-dimensions,
once again we use this abstract notion of
pose represented by Greek letter ksi, and
now we represent the translation and orientation
of one three-dimensional coordinate frame
with respect to another. Later in this lecture
we’ll talk about concrete implementations
of ksi, what it actually means in terms of
things that you can compute with, but for
now just consider that as an abstract symbol.
The notation is the same as it is for the
2-dimensional case and we read this symbol
here as being the pose of coordinate frame
B with respect to coordinate frame A. And
remembering that pose has got two components,
a translational component; that's the distance
between the origins of frame A and frame B,
and a rotational component; how do I rotate
coordinate frame A so that its axes are parallel
to the axes of coordinate frame B.
In 3-dimensions it is not as simple to describe
the orientation of an object. Consider this
airplane. There are a number of ways in which
it can move. It can pitch up and down, it
can roll to the right or it can roll to the
left, and it can yaw to the right or to the
left. So there are number of parameters that
describe the orientation of this body in space.
So the way that we are going to formalise
this is again similar to what we did for the
2-dimensional case, and again we attach a
coordinate frame to the aircraft.
Another coordinate frame here, a blue one
and I'm going to fix it to the aircraft with
the x-axis pointing forward and that means
that the y-axis points over the wing and the
z-axis points upward. So now when it comes
to describing the pose of this aircraft it's
got a translational component, that's the
position of the origin of this coordinate
frame with respect to the origin of this coordinate
frame, and then there is the orientation of
this coordinate frame with respect to this
coordinate frame.
The direction of the positive rotation is
an important concept, and in a 2-dimensional
case rotation was defined as being positive
in this direction. If we consider a 2-dimensional
coordinate frame, then if we grow a z-axis
out of the screen, that is the equivalent
right handed 3-dimensional coordinate frame.
So this positive angle convention in two dimensions
corresponds to a positive rotation about the
z-axis which is coming at us out of the screen.
When we are talking about rotations around
axes we define the direction of positive rotation
again using a right hand rule. So I take my
right hand and I point my thumb along the
axis - in this case it's the z-axis, and I
curl my fingers around, and the direction
of the curl, the direction of the tip of my
fingers is the positive direction. So this
is a positive rotation around the z-axis.
Similarly a rotation around the x-axis - this
a positive rotation around the x-axis and
this is a positive rotation around the y-axis.
When we looked previously at the 2-dimensional
coordinate frame we also had a rule for the
direction of positive rotation in two dimensions.
Here's our 2-dimensional coordinate frame
again, here is our x and y-axis lying on top.
So what we defined as a positive rotation
for a 2-dimensional coordinate frame is actually
a positive rotation around the z-axis, if
you could imagine a z-axis being there.
In robotics, as in many other areas of engineering,
it's really useful and important to attach
coordinate frames to objects. Now here is
an example of a helicopter in flight and where
we can attach a right-handed coordinate frame;
x-axis pointing forward, a y-axis out to the
right, and a z-axis going straight down. Once
we have a coordinate frame attached to the
vehicle, we can then describe its orientation
with respect to another coordinate frame.
We can also describe its motion with respect
to this particular coordinate frame. Forward
is in the x direction, down is in its z direction
and so on. In the example of an industrial
arm type robot, we might have a 3-dimensional
coordinate frame attached to the base of the
robot to indicate where it is with respect
to the world coordinate frame of the factory
and we will attach another 3D coordinate frame
to the gripper, and by convention the z-axis
points outward in the directions of the fingers,
the direction that it might approach an object
for describing a pick up. The y-axis by convention
is the direction between the finger tips, then
we draw in the x-axis so as to create a proper
right-handed 3-dimensional coordinate frame.
If we look into the details of very famous
engineering projects like the Apollo Lunar
Missions, and we look at some of the documentations
which are all available online and here we
can see the x, y and z axis for the Apollo
command module. And similarly for the Lunar
module the documentation shows that the x-axis
is vertically upwards and the z axis is forward
in the direction of the front door. This is
a picture of the massive Saturn V rocket which
got the astronauts to the moon and back, and again
if we look at the documentation carefully,
we can see that the axes for the early stages
of the rocket are clearly indicated. Some of the
coordinate frame conventions are actually
painted on the outside of the rocket, and
if we look closely at this black ring up here
what's called the instrumentation module,
which in the flesh is actually quite a massive
device, we can see quite clearly here is painted
the direction of the positive z direction
and the one at the back we can see the direction
of its negative y-axis. This module is effectively
the inertial measurement unit for the Saturn
V rocket, functionality now is probably equivalent
to what you have in the phone in your pocket.